Document dbosctl migrate (#614)
dbos-inc/dbos-docs: docs/production/dbosctl.md

`dbosctl` is a command-line client for the [Conductor API](./conductor-api.md). It manages workflows, queues, schedules, applications, and API keys against DBOS-managed Conductor or a [self-hosted Conductor](./hosting-conductor.md), with the target selected by a named **profile**.

> The [`dbosctl sysdb`](#system-database-commands) commands are the exception: they open a Postgres [system database](../explanations/system-tables.md) directly — to migrate it, empty it, or re-own its rows after an application is renamed — so they take a database URL rather than a profile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`dbosctl sysdb`](#system-database-commands) commands are the exception: they manage the Postgres [system database](../explanations/system-tables.md) directly, so they take a database URL rather than a profile.
```

---

## System Database Commands

### `dbosctl migrate`

> **Description:**

Reviewer: Let's make this sound less AI, borrow some wording from the existing `dbos migrate` docs

---

## System Database Commands

`dbosctl sysdb` groups the commands that open a database instead of calling Conductor.
They connect to a Postgres (or CockroachDB) [system database](../explanations/system-tables.md) directly, so they take a database URL rather than a profile, and accept none of the [common flags](#common-flags) that resolve one.

> The system schema is shared by every DBOS SDK and the migrations are built into the `dbosctl` binary, so provisioning and maintaining a system database does not require picking an SDK and installing its toolchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The system schema is shared by every DBOS SDK and the migrations are built into the `dbosctl` binary.
```

> The subcommand names are the ones the Python, TypeScript, and Go CLIs use for the same operations — the grouping is `dbosctl`'s own grammar, which groups by noun everywhere else, not a renaming.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

**Shared arguments:**

> - `-D, --db-url <url>`: The system database URL. Overrides `$DBOS_SYSTEM_DATABASE_URL`. Postgres and CockroachDB only — a SQLite system database is migrated by the application process that opens it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `-D, --db-url <url>`: The system database URL. Overrides `$DBOS_SYSTEM_DATABASE_URL`.
```

- `--no-listen-notify`: Leave out the triggers that fire `pg_notify`. See [LISTEN/NOTIFY](#listennotify) below.
- `--print-migrations <all|NUMBER>`: Instead of running the migrations, print their SQL to standard output — `all` for a fresh database, or a migration number to upgrade an existing one.
- `--print-user-role`: Instead of running them, print the SQL statements granting `--app-role` access to the DBOS system tables.
- `--cockroach`: Render the printed SQL for CockroachDB. Print mode only — see [CockroachDB](#cockroachdb) below.

:::info SDK migration config settings
After running `dbosctl sysdb migrate`, configure your application not to alter the system schema on startup where that option exists:

<Tabs groupId="language" queryString="language">
<TabItem value="python" label="Python">

```python
config: DBOSConfig = {
  "name": "my-app",
  "system_database_url": os.environ["DBOS_SYSTEM_DATABASE_URL"],
  "run_migrations": False,
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="typescript" label="TypeScript">

```typescript
await DBOS.launch({
  name: "my-app",
  systemDatabaseUrl: process.env.DBOS_SYSTEM_DATABASE_URL,
  runMigrations: false,
});
```

</TabItem>

> <TabItem value="golang" label="Go">

Reviewer: Just leave out the golang tab until we get this fix into go

  .withDatabaseUrl(System.getenv("DBOS_SYSTEM_JDBC_URL"))
  .withMigrate(false);
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

:::

#### Printing the SQL

If your database is managed by a DBA, or its DDL goes through review, the print modes emit SQL for someone else to apply:

```shell
dbosctl sysdb migrate --print-migrations all > migrations.sql
dbosctl sysdb migrate --print-user-role -r my_app_role > grants.sql
```

Neither mode opens the database, and standard output is nothing but SQL and comments, so it can be redirected straight into a `.sql` file.
If a URL is available the header comment names the database, with the password masked.
The migrations and the grants are separate scripts, usually run by different people at different times, so asking for both at once is a usage error rather than a concatenation.

The generated SQL contains `CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY` and `DROP INDEX CONCURRENTLY`, so it must run outside a transaction block — plain `psql`, not `psql --single-transaction`.
The header comment records that, along with the choices that shaped the script: whether it is for a fresh database, whether the `pg_notify` triggers are included, and whether it is for CockroachDB.

> Nothing downstream can tell those variants apart by reading the SQL, and applying the wrong one leaves a database that does not match what your applications expect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

#### LISTEN/NOTIFY

> By default the system schema carries triggers that fire `pg_notify`, so an application waiting on a message is woken rather than left to poll.

Reviewer: This entire writeup should be one sentence.

That does not work behind a connection pooler in transaction mode: the notification arrives on a session the application does not keep.
Nothing can detect that, so pass `--no-listen-notify`:

```shell
dbosctl sysdb migrate -D postgres://user:password@host:5432/dbos_sys --no-listen-notify
```

The database is complete either way and reports the same migration version. Only the triggers differ, and applications fall back to polling.
A pooler in session mode needs no flag — see the [production checklist](./checklist.md).

#### CockroachDB

> A live migration asks the server what it is, so CockroachDB needs no flag; passing `--cockroach` to one is an error rather than an override.

Reviewer: Again, this whole section could be one sentence

A printed script has no server to ask, so it has to be told:

```shell
dbosctl sysdb migrate --print-migrations all --cockroach > migrations.sql
```

CockroachDB's script differs in more than the triggers — it has no LISTEN/NOTIFY at all, and several statements are spelled differently or left out — and a script generated for the wrong engine fails partway through, leaving a half-migrated database.

---

### `dbosctl sysdb reset`

**Description:**

> Empties the DBOS system tables, deleting the metadata about past workflows and steps.

Reviewer: Make this minimal and descriptive (like the SDK docs), this is overly verbose and too much AI

- `--drop-database`: Drop the whole database instead of emptying the DBOS tables. Cannot be combined with `--app` or `--schema`, both of which describe work inside the database it destroys.
- `--force`: Skip the confirmation prompt. Required when running non-interactively.
- `-o, --output <format>`: Output format for the row counts — `table` (default) or `json`.

`--app` deletes the rows that name it and lets the foreign keys take the rest: every workflow-keyed table cascades from `workflow_status`, so a workflow's steps, messages, events, and streams go with it.
Other applications sharing the schema are untouched, and so are rows no application owns.

Per-table row counts are written to standard output, with progress on standard error, so a scripted reset can read what it removed without parsing log lines.
`--drop-database` prints no counts — the tables go with the database — and neither does a failure, since the deletes are one transaction and a rollback removed nothing.

---

### `dbosctl sysdb rename-application`

**Description:**

> Transfers ownership of everything in the system database — workflows, steps, queues, schedules, and application versions — from an application's old name to its new one.

Reviewer: This can be less verbose

**Arguments:**
- `-f, --from <name>`: The application's previous name. Omit to only adopt unclaimed rows, which then requires `--adopt-unclaimed-rows`.
- `-t, --to <name>`: The application that ends up owning the rows. Required.
- `--adopt-unclaimed-rows`: Also transfer rows no application owns (`application_name` is null).
- `--batch-size <int>`: Completed workflows and steps transferred per transaction. Defaults to 10000.
- `--force`: Skip the confirmation prompt. Required when running non-interactively.
- `-o, --output <format>`: Output format for the row counts — `table` (default) or `json`.

Rows no application owns predate system-database sharing, so claiming them is a decision rather than a default: naming neither source is an error rather than a rename that reports moving nothing.

Queues, schedules, versions, and in-flight workflows move in one transaction — a half-owned application would dequeue work whose version row it can no longer see.
Completed workflows and their steps are unbounded, so they move in batches of `--batch-size` keys, and re-running an interrupted rename picks up where it stopped rather than starting over.

> The counts are rows *durably* transferred: a failure inside the opening transaction reports nothing, because the rollback moved nothing, while a failure in the batched tail reports what committed before it, which is where a re-run picks up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

#### Schema versions

`reset` and `rename-application` both refuse a schema migrated past what your `dbosctl` build knows, and refuse before touching anything.
The tables they work on are named in the binary rather than read from the catalog, so a migration the build has never seen may have added a table it would silently skip — leaving it full, or leaving its rows under the old name, while reporting success.
The system schema is shared by every SDK and they release on their own schedules, so meeting a newer database is normal rather than alarming: upgrade `dbosctl`.

`rename-application` also refuses a schema too old for application names, and one part way into them.
Migrations 100-104 add `application_name` a table at a time, each committing on its own, so a `migrate` interrupted inside that range leaves some tables carrying the column and some not.

> The rename names the tables that are short and tells you to finish migrating, rather than re-owning the ones it can.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
